What is Information Retrieval?
Last Updated : 19 Sep, 2023
Information Retrieval (IR) can be defined as a software program that deals with the organization, storage, retrieval, and evaluation of information from document repositories, particularly textual information. Information Retrieval is the activity of obtaining material that can usually be documented on an unstructured nature i.e. usually text which satisfies an information need from within large collections which is stored on computers. For example, Information Retrieval can be when a user enters a query into the system. 

Not only librarians, professional searchers, etc engage themselves in the activity of information retrieval but nowadays hundreds of millions of people engage in IR every day when they use web search engines. Information Retrieval is believed to be the dominant form of Information access. The IR system assists the users in finding the information they require but it does not explicitly return the answers to the question. It notifies regarding the existence and location of documents that might consist of the required information. Information retrieval also extends support to users in browsing or filtering document collection or processing a set of retrieved documents. The system searches over billions of documents stored on millions of computers. A spam filter, manual or automatic means are provided by Email program for classifying the mails so that it can be placed directly into particular folders. 

An IR system has the ability to represent, store, organize, and access information items. A set of keywords are required to search. Keywords are what people are searching for in search engines. These keywords summarize the description of the information. 

What is an IR Model?
An Information Retrieval (IR) model selects and ranks the document that is required by the user or the user has asked for in the form of a query. The documents and the queries are represented in a similar manner, so that document selection and ranking can be formalized by a matching function that returns a retrieval status value (RSV) for each document in the collection. Many of the Information Retrieval systems represent document contents by a set of descriptors, called terms, belonging to a vocabulary V. An IR model determines the query-document matching function according to four main approaches: 

